[Music]
when you have 21 minutes to speak two
million years seems like a really long
time but evolutionarily two million
years is nothing and yet in two million
years the human brain has nearly tripled
in mass going from the one and a quarter
pound brain of our ancestor here habilis
to the almost three pound meatloaf that
everybody here has between their ears
what is it about a big brain that nature
was so eager for Everyone us to have one
well it turns out when brains triple in
size they don't just get three times
bigger they gain new structures and one
of the main reasons that our brain got
so big is because it got a new part
called the frontal lobe and particularly
a part called the prefrontal cortex now
what does the prefrontal cortex do for
you
that should justify the entire
architectural overhaul of the human
skull in the blink of evolutionary time
well turns out the prefrontal cortex
does lots of things but one of the most
important things it does is it is an
experience simulator
you know flight pilots practice in
flight simulators so that they don't
make real mistakes and planes human
beings have this marvelous adaptation
that they can actually have experiences
in their heads before they try them out
in real life this is a trick that none
of our ancestors could do that no other
animal can do quite like we can it's a
marvelous adaptation it's up there with
opposable thumbs and standing upright
and language as one of the things that
got our species out of the trees and
into the shopping mall now all of you
have done this I mean you know Ben and
Jerry's doesn't have liver in onion ice
cream and it's not because they whipped
some up tried it and went yuck it's
because from without leaving your
armchair you can simulate that flavor
and say yuck before you make it
let's see how your experience simulators
are working let's just run a quick
diagnostic before I proceed with the
rest of the talk
here's two different futures that I
invite you to contemplate and you can
try to simulate them and tell me which
one you think you might prefer one of
them is winning the lottery this is
about 314 million dollars and the other
is becoming paraplegic
so just given a moment of thought you
probably don't feel like you need a
moment of thought and interestingly
there are data on these two groups of
people data on how happy they are and
this is exactly what you expected isn't
it but these aren't the data
I made these up these are the data you
failed the pop quiz in your hardly five
minutes into the lecture because the
fact is that a year after losing the use
of their legs and a year after winning
the lotto
lottery winners and paraplegics are
equally happy with their lives now don't
feel too bad about failing the first pop
quiz because everybody fails all of the
pop quizzes all of the time the research
that my laboratory has been doing that
economists and psychologists around the
country have been doing have revealed
something really quite startling to us
something we call the impact bias which
is the tendency for the simulator to
work badly for the simulator to make you
believe that different outcomes are more
different than in fact they really are
from field studies to laboratory studies
we see that winning or losing an
election gaining or losing a romantic
partner getting or not getting a
promotion passing or not passing a
college test on and on have far less
impact less intensity and much less
duration that people expect them to have
effect a recent study this almost fleurs
me a recent study showing how major life
traumas affect people suggests that if
it happened over three months ago with
only a few exceptions it has no impact
whatsoever on your happiness why because
happiness can be synthesized
Sir Thomas Brown wrote in 1642 I am the
happiest man alive I have that in me
that can
vert poverty to riches adversity to
prosperity I am more invulnerable than
Achilles fortune hath not one place to
hit me kind of remarkable machinery does
this guy have in his head well it turns
out it's precisely the same remarkable
machinery that all of us have human
beings have something that we might
think of as a psychological immune
system a system of cognitive processes
largely non conscious cognitive
processes that help them change their
views of the world so that they can feel
better about the worlds in which they
find themselves like Sir Thomas you have
this machine unlike Sir Thomas you seem
not to know it we synthesize happiness
but we think happiness is a thing to be
found now you don't need me to tell you
give you too many examples of people
synthesizing happiness I suspect though
I'm gonna show you some experimental
evidence you don't have to look very far
for evidence
I challenge to myself since I say this
once in a while on lectures I took a
copy of the New York Times and tried to
find some instances of people
synthesizing happiness and here are
three guys synthesizing happiness I'm so
much better off physically financially
emotionally in almost every other way
mentally almost every other way and one
minutes regret it was a glorious
experience I believe it turned out for
the best who are these characters who
are so damn happy well the first one is
Jim Wright some of you are old enough to
remember he was the chairman of the
House of Representatives and he resigned
in disgrace when this young Republican
named Newt Gingrich found out about
shady book deal he had done he lost
everything most powerful Democrat in the
country lost everything lost his money
lost his power what does he have to say
all these years later about it I am so
much better off physically financially
mentally in almost every other way what
other way would there be to be better
off that stably minerally animal eeee
he's pretty much covered in there
Maurice victim is somebody you've never
heard of Maurice victim uttered these
words upon being released he was 78
years old he'd spent 37 years in
Louisiana State Penitentiary for a crime
he didn't commit he was ultimately
exonerated at the age of 78 through DNA
evidence and what did he have to say
about his experience I don't have one
minutes regret it was a glorious
experience glorious
this guy who's not saying why are some
nice guys there - Jim it's glorious a
word we usually reserved for something
like a religious experience Harriet's
Langerman uttered these words and he's
somebody you might have known but didn't
because in 1949 he read a little article
in the paper about a hamburger stand
owned by these two brothers named
McDonald's and he thought that's a
really neat idea so he went to find them
they said we'd give you a franchise on
this for three thousand bucks Harry went
back to New York asked his brother who
was an investment banker to loan him the
three thousand dollars and his brothers
and mortal words were you idiot nobody
eats hamburgers he wouldn't land the
money and of course six months later Ray
Kroc had exactly the same idea it turns
out people do eat hamburgers and Ray
Kroc for a while became the richest man
in America oh and then finally you know
the best of all possible worlds some of
you recognize this young photo of Pete
best who was the original drummer for
The Beatles until they you know kind of
like sent him out on an errand and snuck
away it picked up Ringo on a tour well
in 1994 when Pete best was interviewed
yes he's still a drummer yes he's a
studio musician he had this to say I'm
happier than I would have been with the
Beatles okay there's something important
to be learned from these people and it
is the secret of happiness here it is
finally to be revealed
first accrue wealth power and prestige
than losing
ii spend as much of your life in prison
as you possibly can
third make somebody else really really
rich and finally never ever join the
beatles okay no I like Z Frank can
predict your next thought which is yeah
right because when people synthesize
happiness is these gentlemen seem to
have done we all smile at them but we
kind of roll our eyes and say yeah right
you never really wanted the job oh yeah
right she you really didn't have that
much in common with her and you figured
that out just about the time she threw
the engagement ring in your face we
smirk because we believe that synthetic
happiness is not of the same quality as
what we might call natural happiness
what are these terms natural happiness
is what we get when we get what we
wanted and synthetic happiness is what
we make when we don't get what we wanted
and in our society we have a strong
belief that synthetic happiness is of an
inferior kind why do we have that belief
well it's very simple
what kind of economic engine would keep
churning if we believe that not getting
what we want could make us just as happy
as getting it with all apologies to my
friend matthieu ricard a shopping mall
full of Zen monks is not going to be
particularly profitable because they
don't want stuff enough I want to
suggest to you that synthetic happiness
is every bit as real and enduring as the
kind of happiness you stumble upon when
you get exactly what you were aiming for
now I'm a scientist so I'm gonna do this
not with a rhetoric but by marinating
you in a little bit of data let me first
show you an experimental paradigm that
is used to demonstrate the synthesis of
happiness among regular old folks this
isn't mine is a 50 year old paradigm
called the free choice paradigm it's
very simple you bring in say six objects
and you ask a subject to rank them for
the most of the least liked in this case
because the experiment I'm going to tell
you about uses them
these are Monet prints so everybody can
rank these Monet prints from the one
they liked the most to the one they
liked the least now we give you a choice
we happen to have
an extra prints in the closet we're
gonna give you one as your prize to take
home we happen to have number three and
number four we tell the subject there's
a bit of a difficult choice because
neither one is preferred strongly to the
other but naturally people tend to pick
number three because they liked it a
little better than number four sometime
later it could be 15 minutes it could be
15 days the same stimuli are put before
the subject and the subject is asked to
rewrite the stimulate tell us how much
you liked them now what happens watch as
happiness is synthesized this is the
result that has been replicated over and
over again
you're watching happiness be synthesised
you'd like to see it again happiness the
one I got is really better than I
thought that other one I didn't get
sucks
that's the synthesis of happiness now
what's the right response to that Yeah
right
now here's the experiment we did and I
hope this is going to convince you that
yeah right was not the right response we
did this experiment with a group of
patients who had antara grade amnesia
these are hospitalized patients most of
them have korsakoff's syndrome paulina
Roddick psychosis that they they drank
way too much and they can't make new
memories okay they remember their
childhood but if you walk in and
introduce yourself and then leave the
room when you come back they don't know
who you are
we took our Monet prints to the hospital
and we asked these patients to rank them
from the one they liked the most to the
one they liked the least we then gave
them the choice between number three and
number four like everybody else they
said gee thanks doc that's great I could
use a new print I'll take number three
we explained we would have number three
mailed to them we gathered up our
materials and we went out of the room
and counted to a half our back into the
room we say hi we're back the patients
bless them say Oh doc I'm sorry I kind
of memory problem so I'm here if I've
met you before I don't remember really
Jim you don't remember I was just here
with the Monet prints sorry doc I just
don't have a clue no problem Jim all I
want you to do is rank these for me from
the one you
like the most the one you like the least
what do they do well let's first check
and make sure they're really amnesiac we
ask these amnesiac patients to tell us
which one they own which one they chose
last time which one is theirs and what
we find is hem music patients just guess
these are normal controls with I did
this with you all of you would know
which print you chose but if I do this
with amnesiac patients they don't have a
clue they can't pick their print out of
a lineup
here's what normal controls do they
synthesize happiness right this is the
change in liking score the change for
the first time they ranked two the
second time they're ranked normal
controls show that was the magic I
showed you now I'm showing it to you in
graphical form the one I own is better
than I thought the one I didn't own the
one I left behind is not as good as I
thought and knee JYP's do exactly the
same thing think about this result these
people liked better the one they own but
they don't know they own it Yeah right
is not the right response what these
people did when they synthesized
happiness is they really truly change
their affective hedonic aesthetic
reactions to that poster they're not
just singing it because they own it
because they don't know they own it now
when psychologists show you bars you
know that they are showing you averages
of lots of people and yet all of us have
this psychological immune system this
capacity to synthesize happiness but
some of us do this trick better than
others and some situations allow anybody
to do it more effectively than other
situations do it turns out that freedom
the ability to make up your mind and
change your mind is the friend of
natural happiness because it allows you
to choose among all those delicious
futures that and find the one that you
would most enjoy but freedom to choose
to change and make up your mind is the
enemy of synthetic happiness and I'm
gonna show you why
Dilbert already knows of course you're
reading the cartoon is I'm
talking dogbert's tech-support how come
AI abuse you my printer prints a blank
page after every document why would you
complain about getting free paper
freezes giving my own paper egad man
look at the quality of the free paper
compared to your lousy regular paper my
fool or a liar would say that they look
the same now that you mention it it does
seem a little silkier what are you doing
I'm helping people accept the things
they cannot change indeed the
psychological immune system works best
when we are totally stuck when we are
trapped this is this is the difference
from dating in marriage right I mean you
go out on a date with a guy and he picks
his nose you don't go out on another
date you're married to a guy and he
picks his nose you know he has a heart
of gold don't touch the fruitcake right
you find a way to be happy with what's
happened now what I want to show you is
that people don't know this about
themselves and not knowing this can work
to our supreme disadvantage here's an
experiment we did it Harvard we created
a photography course a black-and-white
photography course and we allowed
students to come in and learn how to use
a darkroom so we gave them cameras they
went around campus they took 12 pictures
of their favorite professors in their
dorm room and their you know their dog
and all the other things they wanted to
have heard memories of they bring us the
camera we make up a contact sheet they
figure out which are the two best
pictures and we now spend six hours
teaching them about dark rooms and they
blow two of them up and they have two
gorgeous eight-by-ten glossies of
meaningful things to them and we say
which one would you like to give up I
have to give one up oh yes we need one
is evidence of the class project so you
have to give me one you have to make a
choice you get to keep one and I get to
keep one now there are two conditions in
this experiment in one case the students
are told but you know if you want to
change your mind I'll always have the
other one here and in the next four days
before I actually mail it to
headquarters
I'd be glad to headquarters I'll be glad
to swap it out with you in fact I'll
come to your dorm room and give just
give me an email better yet I'll check
with you you ever want to change your
mind it's totally returnable the other
half of the students are told exactly
the opposite make your choice and by the
way the mail is going out gosh in two
minutes to England your pick
sure we'll be winging its way over the
Atlantic you will never see it again
now half of the students in each of
these conditions are asked to make
predictions about how much they're going
to come to like the picture that they
keep in the picture they leave behind
other students are just sent back to
their little dorm rooms and they are
measured over the next six three to six
days on their liking satisfaction with
the pictures and look at what we find
first of all here's what students think
is going to happen they think they're
gonna maybe come to like the picture
they chose a little more than the one
they left behind but these are not
statistically significant differences it
really it's this very small increase and
it doesn't much matter whether they were
in the reversible or irreversible
condition wrong Oh bad simulators
because here's what's really happening
both right before the swap and five days
later people who are stuck with that
picture who have no choice who can never
change their mind liked it a lot and
people who are deliberating should I
return it have I gotten the right one
maybe this isn't the good one maybe I
left the good one have killed themselves
they don't like their picture and in
fact even after the opportunity to swap
has expired they still don't like their
picture why because the irreversible
condition is not conducive to the
synthesis of happiness so here's the
final piece of this experiment we bring
in a whole new group of naive Harvard
students and we say you know we're doing
a photography course and we can do it
one of two ways we could do it so that
when you take the two pictures you'd
have four days to change your mind
oh we're doing another course where you
take the two pictures and you make up
your mind right away and you can never
change it which course would you like to
be in sixty-six percent of the students
two-thirds prefer to be in the course
where they have the opportunity to
change their mind hello sixty-six
percent of the students choose to be in
the course in which they will ultimately
be deeply dissatisfied with the picture
because they do not know the conditions
under which synthetic happiness grows
the Bard said everything best of course
and he's making my point here but
he's making it hyperbolically tis
nothing good or bad but thinking makes
it so
it's nice poetry but that can't exactly
be right is there really nothing good or
bad is it really the case that
gallbladder surgery and a trip to Paris
are just the same thing yeah there that
seems like a one-question IQ test
they can't be exactly the same in more
turgid pros but closer to the truth was
the father of modern capitalism Adam
Smith and he said this this is worth
contemplating the great source of both
the misery and disorders of human life
seems to arise from over rating the
difference between one permanent
situation and another some of these
situations may no doubt deserve to be
preferred to others but none of them can
be desert none of them can deserve to be
pursued with that passionate ardor which
drives us to violate the rules either of
prudence or of justice or to corrupt the
future tranquility of our minds either
by shame from the remembrance of our own
folly or by remorse for the horror of
our own injustice in other words yes
some things are better than others we
should have preferences that lead us
into one future over another but when
those preferences drive us too hard and
too fast because we have overrated the
difference between these futures we are
at risk when our ambition is bounded it
leads us to work joyfully when our
ambition is unbounded it leads us to lie
to cheat to steal to hurt others to
sacrifice things of real value when our
fears are bounded we're prudent we're
cautious
we're thoughtful when our fears are
unbounded and overblown we're reckless
and we're cowardly the lesson I want to
leave you with from these data is that
our longings and our worries are both to
some degree overblown because we have
within us the capacity to manufacture
the very commodity we are constantly
chasing when we choose experience thank
you
what if great ideas weren't cherished
what if they carried no importance
[Music]
or held no value there is a place where
artistic vision is protected where
inspired design ideas live on to become
ultimate driving machines
[Music]
you